.1
6
Discuss the availability of naloxone for the emergency treatment of opioid overdose with the patient and caregiver and assess the potential need for access to naloxone, both when initiating and renewing treatment with KADIAN [see Warnings and Precautions (\n5.3\n), Patient Counseling Information (\n17\n)].\nInform patients and caregivers about the various ways to obtain naloxone as permitted by individual state naloxone dispensing and prescribing requirements or guidelines (e.g., by prescription, directly from a pharmacist, or as part of a community-based program).\nConsider prescribing naloxone, based on the patient\u2019s risk factors for overdose, such as concomitant use of CNS depressants, a history of opioid use disorder, or prior opioid overdose. The presence of risk factors for overdose should not prevent the proper management of pain in any given patient [see Warnings and Precautions (\n5.1\n, \n5.3\n, \n5.5\n)].\nConsider prescribing naloxone if the patient has household members (including children) or other close contacts at risk for accidental ingestion or overdose.
Use of KADIAN as the First Opioid Analgesic\n (opioid-na\xefve patients)\nThere has been no evaluation of KADIAN as an initial opioid analgesic in the management of pain. Because it may be more difficult to titrate a patient to adequate analgesia using an extended-release morphine, begin treatment using an immediate-release morphine formulation and then convert patients to KADIAN as described below.\nUse of KADIAN in Patients who are not Opioid Tolerant\n (opioid non-tolerant patients)\nThe starting dose for patients who are not opioid tolerant is KADIAN 30 mg orally every 24 hours.  \nUse of higher starting doses in patients who are not opioid tolerant may cause fatal respiratory depression.\nConversion from Other Opioids to KADIAN\nDiscontinue all other around-the-clock opioid drugs when KADIAN therapy is initiated.\nThere are no established conversion ratios from other opioids to KADIAN defined by clinical trials.  Initiate dosing using KADIAN 30 mg orally every 24 hours.  \nIt is safer to underestimate a patient's 24-hour oral morphine dosage and provide rescue medication (e.g. immediate-release morphine) than to overestimate the 24-hour oral morphine dosage and manage an adverse reaction due to an overdose. While useful tables of opioid equivalents are readily available, there is inter-patient variability in the potency of opioid drugs and formulations.\nClose observation and frequent titration are warranted until pain management is stable on the new opioid. Monitor patients for signs and symptoms of opioid withdrawal and for signs of oversedation/toxicity after converting patients to KADIAN.\nConversion from Other Oral Morphine Formulations to KADIAN \nPatients receiving other oral morphine formulations may be converted to KADIAN by administering one-half of the patient\u2019s total daily oral morphine dose as KADIAN twice daily or by administering the total daily oral morphine dose as KADIAN once daily. There are no data to support the efficacy or safety of prescribing KADIAN more frequently than every 12 hours.\nKADIAN is not bioequivalent to other extended-release morphine preparations.  Conversion from the same total daily dose of another extended-release morphine product to KADIAN may lead to either excessive sedation at peak or inadequate analgesia at trough.  Therefore, monitor patients closely when initiating KADIAN therapy and adjust the dosage of KADIAN as needed.\nConversion from Parenteral Morphine, or Other Opioids to KADIAN \nWhen converting from parenteral morphine or other non-morphine opioids (parenteral or oral) to KADIAN, consider the following general points:\n\tParenteral to Oral Morphine Ratio\nBetween 2 mg and 6 mg of oral morphine may be required to provide analgesia equivalent to 1 mg of parenteral morphine. Typically, a dose of oral morphine that is three times the daily parenteral morphine requirement is sufficient.\n\tOther Oral or Parenteral Opioids to Oral Morphine \nRatios\nSpecific recommendations are not available because of a lack of systematic evidence for these types of analgesic substitutions. Published relative potency data are available, but such ratios are approximations. In general, begin with half of the estimated daily morphine requirement as the initial dose, managing inadequate analgesia by supplementation with immediate-release morphine. \nConversion from Methadone to KADIAN\nClose monitoring is of particular importance when converting from methadone to other opioid agonists. The ratio between methadone and other opioid agonists may vary widely as a function of previous dose exposure. Methadone has a long half-life and can accumulate in the plasma.
Individually titrate KADIAN to a dose that provides adequate analgesia and minimizes adverse reactions.  Continually reevaluate patients receiving KADIAN to assess the maintenance of pain control and the relative incidence of adverse reactions, as well as monitoring for the development of addiction, abuse, or misuse [see Warnings\n and Precautions (\n5.1\n)].  Frequent communication is important among the prescriber, other members of the healthcare team, the patient, and the caregiver/family during periods of changing analgesic requirements, including initial titration.  During chronic therapy, periodically reassess the continued need for the use of opioid analgesics.\nPatients who experience breakthrough pain may require a dosage adjustment of KADIAN, or may need rescue medication with an appropriate dose of an immediate-release analgesic.  If the level of pain increases after dose stabilization, attempt to identify the source of increased pain before increasing the KADIAN dosage.  In patients experiencing inadequate analgesia with once daily dosing of KADIAN, consider a twice daily regimen. Because steady-state plasma concentrations are approximated within 24 to 36 hours, KADIAN dosage adjustments may be done every 1 to 2 days.  \nIf unacceptable opioid-related adverse reactions are observed, consider reducing the dosage.  Adjust the dosage to obtain an appropriate balance between management of pain and opioid-related adverse reactions.
Do not abruptly discontinue KADIAN in patients who may be physically dependent on opioids. Rapid discontinuation of opioid analgesics in patients who are physically dependent on opioids has resulted in serious withdrawal symptoms, uncontrolled pain, and suicide. Rapid discontinuation has also been associated with attempts to find other sources of opioid analgesics, which may be confused with drug-seeking for abuse. Patients may also attempt to treat their pain or withdrawal symptoms with illicit opioids, such as heroin, and other substances.\nWhen a decision has been made to decrease the dose or discontinue therapy in an opioid-dependent patient taking KADIAN, there are a variety of factors that should be considered, including the dose of KADIAN the patient has been taking, the duration of treatment, the type of pain being treated, and the physical and psychological attributes of the patient. It is important to ensure ongoing care of the patient and to agree on an appropriate tapering schedule and follow-up plan so that patient and provider goals and expectations are clear and realistic. When opioid analgesics are being discontinued due to a suspected substance use disorder, evaluate and treat the patient, or refer for evaluation and treatment of the substance use disorder. Treatment should include evidence-based approaches, such as medication assisted treatment of opioid use disorder. Complex patients with comorbid pain and substance use disorders may benefit from referral to a specialist.\nThere are no standard opioid tapering schedules that are suitable for all patients. Good clinical practice dictates a patient-specific plan to taper the dose of the opioid gradually. For patients on KADIAN who are physically opioid-dependent, initiate the taper by a small enough increment (e.g., no greater than 10% to 25% of the total daily dose) to avoid withdrawal symptoms, and proceed with dose-lowering at an interval of every 2 to 4 weeks. Patients who have been taking opioids for briefer periods of time may tolerate a more rapid taper.\nIt may be necessary to provide the patient with lower dosage strengths to accomplish a successful taper. Reassess the patient frequently to manage pain and withdrawal symptoms, should they emerge. Common withdrawal symptoms include restlessness, lacrimation, rhinorrhea, yawning, perspiration, chills, myalgia, and mydriasis. Other signs and symptoms also may develop, including irritability, anxiety, backache, joint pain, weakness, abdominal cramps, insomnia, nausea, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, or increased blood pressure, respiratory rate, or heart rate. If withdrawal symptoms arise, it may be necessary to pause the taper for a period of time or raise the dose of the opioid analgesic to the previous dose, and then proceed with a slower taper. In addition, monitor patients for any changes in mood, emergence of suicidal thoughts, or use of other substances.\nWhen managing patients taking opioid analgesics, particularly those who have been treated for a long duration and/or with high doses for chronic pain, ensure that a multimodal approach to pain management, including mental health support (if needed), is in place prior to initiating an opioid analgesic taper. A multimodal approach to pain management may optimize the treatment of chronic pain, as well as assist with the successful tapering of the opioid analgesic [see Warnings and Precautions (\n5.13\n), Drug Abuse and Dependence (\n9.3\n)].
KADIAN capsules must be taken whole.  Crushing, chewing, or dissolving the pellets in KADIAN capsules will result in uncontrolled delivery of morphine and can lead to overdose or death [\nsee Warnings and Precautions (\n5.1\n)\n].\nAlternatively, the contents of the KADIAN capsules (pellets) may be sprinkled over applesauce and then swallowed.  This method is appropriate only for patients able to reliably swallow the applesauce without chewing.  Other foods have not been tested and should not be substituted for applesauce.  Instruct the patient to: \nSprinkle the pellets onto a small amount of applesauce and consume immediately without chewing.\nRinse the mouth to ensure all pellets have been swallowed.\nDiscard any unused portion of the KADIAN capsules after the contents have been sprinkled on applesauce.\nThe contents of the KADIAN capsules (pellets) may be administered through a French gastrostomy tube.\nFlush the gastrostomy tube with water to ensure that it is wet.\nSprinkle the KADIAN Pellets into 10 mL of water.\nUse a swirling motion to pour the pellets and water into the gastrostomy tube through a funnel.\nRinse the beaker with a further 10 mL of water and pour this into the funnel.\nRepeat rinsing until no pellets remain in the beaker.\nDo not administer KADIAN pellets through a nasogastric tube.
3
3
4
2
